---
layout: post
title: 안녕히 가십시오, g-gpa
date: 2017-09-10
---

my heart hurts. it's the kinda hurt that tears a cavity in your chest, a breath that squeezes your heart just a bit harder than it should, that pits itself in your stomach, a very unsettled sadness. today i said good bye to my paternal great-grandfather. he lived a good life, from his appointment as minister of information in korea to a professor at yonsei and southwestern, to the strict patriarchical head of the family i remember him as. i only saw him every couple of years, and most of my encounters occurred after he entered the period of mental decline that dictated his last 1.5 decades, but there was no doubt that i attributed my strong sense of family to him.

my great-grandparents had 4 children: my grandfather, the oldest, one daughter, and two younger sons. my great-uncle passed from cancer 9 years ago which was really tough on my family, but each of the four children and/or their spouses and children were present. my brothers and i are the only great-grandchildren, and we represented the fourth alive generation in my family. 

i saw him last night, as soon as i flew into texas. as someone who is on the path to study medicine and who has previously been preoccupied with theology, i can't say i have a theory of where people go, or when they exactly leave us, but i think my g-gpa left a while ago. my brothers visited him when i was in california earlier this summer and he had moments of lucidity but they were brief and rare. he still had a great appetite, but his functionality was low. in the past few months he's been hospitalized a couple times, and he was transferred to hospice about a week ago. thankfully the roads have cleared up enough to drive - my fam couldn't visit him for a couple days because of the water levels. 

at 10:30 we held a Christian memorial service, because my grandfather is a pastor within the Presbyterian church. the jipsa wanted my great-grandmother to be baptized even though she expressed she was uncomfortable and that she wasn't ready. it caused a lot of tension within my family & a lot of people were upset, but a few minutes later it didn't seem to matter because we were all crowded around my great grandfather, saying our last goodbyes.

we started sharing stories about my great-grandfather. my grandfather's brother said that he learned how to be a thinking man, and that's what he'll remember. my dad said that when my great grandfather's mom passed away, he said to remember someone by the life they left and the things they taught you. 

the session was cut short as we were called into his room. he left us at 11:11 this morning. 11. my soccer jersey number. my favorite and lucky number. I inherited it from my father, who got it from his. that was supposed to console my grandpa, that his dad passed at 11:11. seeing my grandpa like that broke me heart, again and again. the passing of time pierced the air from the small clock hanging on the wall. my great-grandparents are won buddhists and a man and woman from 원불교 (whom I met when I was a little kid) performed a ceremony after they announced his death.

things have always seemed more genuine in korean, or at least closer to my heart. i had a hard time translating what was being said during the ceremony, but the won buddhist said something about how spirits could be tied down to the earth if they are mourned too much, or asked to stay. the buddhist mourning period is 49 days and the woman told us that we should be especially thoughtful in calling (my) great-grandmother often, and keeping them both in our thoughts.

he was a good-looking man. my brothers and i spent last night scanning pictures from his lifetime to compile for the memorial slideshow. he had confidence and was very charming (as every political man should be!) and stylish. the last time i saw him he gave me and my youngest brother girl advice. his memory was already slipping then (later, a diagnosis of early-onset dementia) and he'd tell the same set of stories each time, but i loved hearing about his professorial days and his political youth. 

the last time i saw my ggpa before this trip was also the first time i saw the childishness of my 72 year old grandpa, the childishness only a child can show towards their parents. these past few months have been really hard on him (especially with his own health complications), and my heart still breaks. to see him grieve was to grieve myself. 

my mom said that when she passes she doesn't want a tombstone or to be buried: she wants to be cremated and spread across a body of water or land, that she'll be remembered by those that remember her, not as some static entity in the ground. in many regards, his legacy is us: each of his grand and great-grandchildren in pursuit of education with work ethic and compassion, every hardship bared, the work of family itself. or at least that's how i'll remember him.

안녕히 가십시오. 