---
layout: post
title: “For the archives”
date: 2021-03-10
---

cw: dv ment in paragraph 4

P and I joke about “the archives” all the time. We’re usually referring to personal archives & how I take too many pictures when we hang out, but personal archives more broadly can also include IG feeds (mumble mumble data capitalism), projects like this or tinyletters/any number of self-started newsletter projects or blogs, p*dcasts dare I say, and even small boxes of memorabilia people store their nostalgia inside if we’re thinking in the analog – but I’ve also been thinking vaguely about collective archives for some time now too.

A few years ago, when I met C through (the 501c3 that shall not be named), we bonded quickly over oral histories and archives. From learning about apienc’s dragonfruit project/others that have sought to capture the stories of queer elders, to listening to my grandparents tell folk tales and stories from their own youth, to learning about the underground cyber queer networks in Corea from the early 2000’s, or scraping through more formal archives/records and finding myself frustrated at what’s missing (like women from my family tree….), I’ve always seen archive as something strikingly alive or devastatingly absent – nonstatic either way. One of the most thought-provoking books I read in 2019 was Solar Storms by linda hogan that – against the backdrop of navigating family reunification/reckoning with ab*se and a defense against construction of a hydroelectric dam – depicts the remembrance of indigenous, matrilineal, and embodied knowledges within the protagonist & other woman in the novel.

honestly I haven’t really thought much about my own relationship to ancestral practices all too much, outside of sparse conversations here and there. S and I have talked a little bit about wanting to know more, and about mudangs and whatnot especially as ‘celebrity’ status practitioners have been popping up – and I return to this notion of living archives as social media has cultivated spaces for easier propagation (koreaarchives, NDD’s history posts, shaman.mudang’s offerings, etc.) SP recently brought up their own practices/ideologies around ancestry, and I had a full moon ritual of my own for the first time last cycle, set with my own reflections, readings, intentions, and offerings. It’s definitely something I’ve started dipping my toes into… slowly, slowly. Quite a few of my friends have also been visited by ancestors in their dreams lately too!

As a person of corean descent I’ve seen how my desire to think about motherland has shifted in the past year, beyond cultural bridging or aesthetic yearning (I’m still laughing at when H said that han and jeong are just diasporic coreans latching onto two antiquated academic terms) or broader angsty diaspora artwork – in ways that are rooted in equal parts resistance and loss, and that also aren’t necessarily lenient to the shit Corea has had its hand in in other countries… A lot of this shift began with the realization of just how deep my indoctrination into anti-dprk narratives and more generally western media was. Much of this “political education” and built comradeship also bubbles within me as a latently felt loss of… not really knowing either of my grandma’s stories all too well, both of whom were born in the northern part of Corea (along with one of my grandfathers), one of whom passed bc of dv before I was born. In that sense, whenever I think about the “absence” of archives and history, the word sever fills my entire body with sadness. Coreans are clearly not alone in having been colonized/ravaged by us imperialism, or in having a history that has been destroyed/erased/rewritten many times or subject to censorship in other ways & even as I make fun of coreans for being so insufferable in their ethnonationalism at times, there’s still a lot of capital L loss to grapple with in thinking about the violence of colonial machines globally. In part I recognize that a lot of this analysis is not mine to make but have been trying to parse out / find alignment in a way that finds its grounds both locally and internationally, and in ways that are increasingly critical of the media I consume…

S shared their senior thesis with me last week on assemblage & the corean body and I’ve been turning over their question of “what survives colonial destruction?” for days and thinking about what gets reified within/legitimized by archives themselves or academized by the White scholar/curator. A few weeks ago I watched “The Violence of a Civilization without Secrets,” a short film that prompted a lot of reflection on indigenous sovereignty and the violence of museums which also reminded me of the Sedlec Ossuary in Kutná Hora (bone!!!! church!!!!!! wtf). But even still, any critiques or ideas that exist in the academic realm don’t viscerally appeal to me very much because their material conclusions and outputs are, often times, just… more academic scholarship?

And yet, the archive has for some time been very alluring to me – specifically as a place to locate power/care/labor/love. Last month M sent me this mini documentary on the Christopher Street Pier in NYC and how the city’s development projects in the 90’s and early 2000’s started fencing out poor queer youth of color, many of whom were houseless, who saw the piers as their stomping grounds – and some of the organizing that was happening in response to gaybashing/c*ps/etc. At the action last week, as we were drumming on the bridge (offering up a few beats into an entire brigade of sound), a few workers would occasionally enter our circle – dancing, screaming, laughing; that shit really felt ancestral/holy in some sort of way. Which left & leaves me thinking about how we document and theorize outside of only trying to understand, which is certainly not a new question, but whose answers continuously percolate within me, in seeding different practices of art/writing, community care, newfound/hybrid language forms, dancing, music making/sharing, storytelling, rituals, and onwards. and onwards–

Last summer C mailed me the Dari Project anthology, which she found on a shelf at (another 501c3 that shall not be named) when they were moving out of their office. The book was a project of the early 2000’s and a collection of coming out and other stories of queer (mostly cis and largely men…) Coreans, written in both english and corean, with a few pieces of artwork/poetry at the end. As I read it, it felt like an ode to a particular moment in time/queer narrative, no longer urgent but still important for its time. In a recent meeting w/ the co-curators of the publication, they spoke of the obstacles they faced and how much labor/time went into it (10 years!!) and made me think/appreciate infrastructures of care, then and now? People always talk about our community “elders” or in past movements in some sort of mystical way as if a large part of it wasn’t just people who came together and were trying so hard to survive – to feed/house each other, to relish in joy, to exist outside of a statehood and society that was/is so violent to them. I’ve been REALLY REALLY thinking though, in so many ways, about this notion of queerness requiring innovation/creation but I think that’ll be for another time. In this meeting, as we were talking, it felt like the next iteration might/would/should reflect our dreams of collective liberation rather than a project of individuals ‘finding themselves’ – making it not a project of echolocation (“I am here! here!”) but of something that helps us declare our us-ness, allowing us meet our own absence and transform our relationship to the past, to the archive itself? Dari means bridge in corean after all…